Effective Computational Geometry of High Dimensional Data (CGHD)


I. Summary

1. Unveiling the geometry of data. 
structure exists, conveys information, recovering this information is
an important issue for applications : compression, analysis/learning,
automatic processing of huge amounts of data
Examples : images, galaxies, bio

2. Early geometric approaches, the emerging field of structural data analysis 
dimension reduction, NL manifold learning, computational topology, geometric inference
3d data processing, surface reconstruction, simplification. 

3. Scientific challenges
-- Beyond affine models and euclidean spaces: diffusion, hyperbolic
geometry, Bregman
-- Statistical nature of data
-- Walking around the curse of dimensionality 
-- Adressing applications with new methodologies

4. Methodology
-- Mathematically sounded approaches (one cannot see or check)
-- Algorithms that are of both theoretical and practical interest
-- A software architecture that ensures genericity, robustness, efficiency
-- A voluntary action towards code diffusion

5. An opportunity for Europe
-- CGAL etc
-- Carlsson company (similar topics but maths)

6. Objectives
-- settle foundations for structural data analysis
-- provide robust and efficient open code with guarantees
-- demonstrate the availability of the approach on some applications

II. Worktasks

A. Fundamental data structures and algorithms

1. Data structures with an intrinsic dimension sensitivity : NN
search, small simplicial complexes, Delaunay-like, random, compact
representation, entropy, parallelism (thèse Clément), intrinsic
algorithms (based on an oracle providing interpoint distances)

2. Computational geometry in non euclidean spaces : Riemannian manifolds,
hyperbolic, Bregman, statistical spaces (including distance to a proba
measure?) (thèse 2)

3. Towards removing the curse of dimensionality : intrinsic
dimension, practical. Many recent results from the CG community (ANN, proof
of SVM, better algo for SVM, core sets,...) (thèse 3)

4. Structural data analysis : dimension reduction, non linear manifold
learning, beating the sampling bounds **, clustering,  persistent homology, topology preserving
approximation/simplification 


B. Software development

6. CGAL-HiD (ingénieurs)

C. Application/validation

impliquer des industriels --> données, pbs

7. Configuration spaces of robots and molecules (thèse )
8. Meshing of high-dimensional manifolds
9. Visualization of high-dimensional data

Needs
-- rare profile : high high level engineers (cannot be found in academia)

**(see compressive sensing)
the current bounds ensure topological correctness at the price of good
geometric approximation. is it necessary ? NP-hardness result of
Attali and Lieutier


