Geometric Modeling in Higher Dimensions

I. Summary

1. Beyond the 3rd dimension
phase-space, configuration spaces, molecules, data analysis

spaces of images, shapes

Unveiling the geometry of data. 
structure exists, conveys information, recovering this information is
an important issue for applications : compression, analysis/learning,
automatic processing of huge amounts of data
Examples : images, galaxies, bio

2. Approximation and inference

High dimensions, highly non-linear, extrinsic/intrinsic, qualitative (topology) /quantitative (geometry)

Early geometric approaches, the emerging field of structural data analysis 
dimension reduction, NL manifold learning, computational topology, geometric inference
3d data processing, surface reconstruction, simplification. 

core-sets, ANN 
e-nets : 

random sampling of configuration spaces, energy landscapes

need for certified approximations

3. Scientific challenges
-- Beyond affine models and euclidean spaces: diffusion, hyperbolic
geometry, Bregman
-- Bypassing the curse of dimensionality 
-- Developing certified, efficient and easy-to-use software platform

4. Methodology
-- Mathematically sounded approaches (one cannot see or check)
-- Algorithms that are of both theoretical and practical interest
-- A software architecture that ensures genericity, robustness, efficiency
-- A voluntary action towards code diffusion

5. An opportunity for Europe
-- CGAL etc
-- Carlsson company (similar topics but maths)

6. Objectives
-- settle foundations for geometric modeling in higher dimensions
-- provide robust and efficient open code with guarantees
-- demonstrate the availability of the approach on some applications


II. State of the art and objectives

Geometric modelling in R^3 : CG, identification of a core of basic
data structures (arrangements, Voronoi diagrams, triangulations),
mathematically oriented (proofs), steered by major applications like
GIS, visualization, motion planning, mesh generation, surface reconstruction

CGAL : from theory to practice and back to theory. Need for robust
algorithms -> algebraic and arithmetic issues, careful handling of
degenerate situations (cite Lieutier). Ex of new theory : evaluation of signs of determinants.

Higher dimensions : the new era of CG. Distinguish between moderate
and very high dimensions. Intermediate situations : low intrinsic
dimension, double dimension, discrete metric spaces.




II. Methodology

A. Fundamental data structures and algorithms

1. Data structures with an intrinsic dimension sensitivity : NN
search, small simplicial complexes, Delaunay-like, random, compact
representation, entropy, parallelism (thèse Clément), intrinsic
algorithms (based on an oracle providing interpoint distances)

2. Computational geometry in non euclidean spaces : Riemannian manifolds,
hyperbolic, Bregman, statistical spaces (including distance to a proba
measure?) (thèse 2)

3. Towards removing the curse of dimensionality : intrinsic
dimension, practical. Many recent results from the CG community (ANN, proof
of SVM, better algo for SVM, core sets,...) (thèse 3)

4. Structural data analysis : dimension reduction, non linear manifold
learning, beating the sampling bounds **, clustering,  persistent homology, topology preserving
approximation/simplification 


B. Software development

6. CGAL-HiD (ingénieurs)

C. Application/validation

impliquer des industriels --> données, pbs

7. Configuration spaces of robots and molecules (thèse )
8. Meshing of high-dimensional manifolds
9. Visualization of high-dimensional data

Needs
-- rare profile : high high level engineers (cannot be found in academia)

**(see compressive sensing)
the current bounds ensure topological correctness at the price of good
geometric approximation. is it necessary ? NP-hardness result of
Attali and Lieutier


REF


Topological Methods in Data Analysis and Visualization, Pascucci,
Springer

Scientific visualization:
the visual extraction of knowledge from data, GP Bonneau, Springer

http://comptop.stanford.edu/

Carlsson, de Silva,

Vempala : http://rjlipton.wordpress.com/2009/07/22/open-problems-in-high-dimension-geometry/

speech recognition :
http://www.math.ufl.edu/~kknudson/Knudsonresearch.html

cancer
 http://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/06/science/david-patterson-enlist-computer-scientists-in-cancer-fight.html?_r=1&ref=science


bourses de masters

summer schools


